THE EFFECT OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN RETURN ON CAPITAL AND ECONOMIC GROWTH ON
                              ECONOMIC INEQUALITY
                           Christopher Lang (cl982)
                                 January 2024

                                     GOALS
Thomas Piketty argues that when return on capital is greater than economic
growth, wealth inequality is increased [1]. This report investigates his
proposition by considering a simple economic model.

                                  METHODOLOGY
Our model [2] consists of 50,000 individuals, each starting with one unit
wealth and a randomly selected, fixed income. Each timestep begins with
the increase of each individual wealth by the global return on capital
constant. Then individuals are randomly grouped into pairs, each pair randomly
distributes their shared wealth between themselves - this is to simulate
economic exchange. Finally, every individual receives their income and the
total wealth in the system is normalized to 50,000 units - this is to avoid
wage inflation and numerical stability issues.
    The total income earned and total return on capital per timestep are equal
to 50,000*g and 50,000*r respectively, where g is the economic growth constant
and r is the return on capital constant.
    Twenty simulations will be run with return on capital constant ranging
between 0% and 19%, and a fixed economic growth constant equal to 5%. The
return on capital constant is to be plotted against the average gini coefficient
in the last 50 timesteps of a 150 timesteps simulation.

                                    RESULTS
The following graph, produced by our model, shows a strong positive linear
correlation between return on capital and the gini coefficient, measuring
economic inequality.
!IMAGE_SIZE 250
!IMAGE plot.png


                                  CONCLUSION
Our evidence supports Thomas Piketty's argument. We have shown that in a
simple economic model, when return on capital is greater than economic growth,
economic inequality is increased. In fact, inequality continues to increase as
return on capital increases beyond economic growth.
    It is important to acknowledge the limitations of our model. We admit that
there may exist a property that applies to real economic systems, but not our
model, that nullifies this effect. However, we are not aware of such a
property.



--
[1] T. Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century (August 2013)
[2] Model Source, https://github.com/Chris-F5/capital_investigation
